Allow use to reference entire files (#1005)
MicrosoftEdge/MSEdgeExplainers: SVG/allow-use-to-reference-entire-files.md

The above [limitation](#3-current-limitation) introduces the below issues while using fragment identifier":

### 4.1 Manual Editing: 

**Example:** Consider an SVG file without an id: 

```html
<svg version="1.1" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" viewBox="0,0,512,512"> 
  <circle cx="256" cy="256" r="200"/> 
</svg> 
```

To use this SVG with a <use> tag, you need to add an id: 

```html
<svg id="icon" version="1.1" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" viewBox="0,0,512,512"> 
  <circle cx="256" cy="256" r="200"/> 
</svg> 
```

Then reference it: 

```html
<svg> 
  <use xlink:href="myshape.svg#icon"/>
</svg> 
```

### 4.2 Downsides of Using id# 

- **Increased Workload:** Manually adding id attributes to each SVG file increases the workload, especially if you have many SVG files. 

- **Error-Prone:** Manual editing can lead to errors, such as typos or missing id attributes. 

- **Inconsistent Updates:** If the SVG files are updated frequently, ensuring that each file has the correct id can be challenging and lead to inconsistencies. 

- **Maintenance Overhead:** Keeping track of id attributes and ensuring they are correctly referenced adds to the maintenance overhead. 

> Note: SVG `image` element currently supports referencing entire SVG files, much like this proposal for `use`.

Reviewer: I would add another sentence here to explain why these should both exist - "The API surface and behaviors between `image` and `use` are significantly different, leaving room for both versions."

Author: Added the note as you suggested. Thanks

# Allow `use` to reference an external document's root element by omitting the fragment. 

## Authors:
- Divyansh Mangal (dmangal@microsoft.com) (https://github.com/goldenboy777)

## Participate
Feature request: [[SVG2] Allow <use> to reference entire files.](https://issues.chromium.org/issues/40362369)

Spec: [https://svgwg.org/svg2-draft/struct.html#UseElement](https://svgwg.org/svg2-draft/struct.html#UseElement)

## Table of Contents

- [1. Introduction](#1-introduction)
- [2. Problem Statement](#2-problem-statement)
- [3. Current Limitation](#3-current-limitation)
- [4. Motivation](#4-motivation-and-user-use-case)
  - [4.1 Manual Editing:](#41-manual-editing)
  - [4.2 Downsides of Using id#](#42-downsides-of-using-id)
- [5. Proposed Approach](#5-proposed-approach)
- [6. Customer/Developer Feedback: Pain Points](#6-customerdeveloper-feedback-pain-points)
- [7. References & acknowledgements](#7-references--acknowledgements)

## 1. Introduction

> The `use` element in SVG allows for the reuse of existing SVG elements by referencing them. This helps reduce the amount of code and makes it easier to manage and update SVG graphics. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `use` element in SVG allows for the reuse of existing SVG elements by referencing them, but currently browsers only support these being `id` references. We propose that browsers also support the [SVG2](https://svgwg.org/svg2-draft/struct.html#UseElement) capability of allowing a `use` reference to refer to an entire file, without `id`.
```
Best if the introduction also mentions the problem being solved.

## 2. Problem Statement 

> The `use` element does not support referencing entire SVG files directly. It only allows referencing specific elements within an SVG file using an id attribute/fragment identifier. This limitation creates significant friction for developers, as it requires manual modification of the source SVG files — adding id attributes or defining fragment identifiers — in order to use it. This manual process not only increases development and maintenance overhead but is also error-prone and can lead to inconsistencies, particularly in scenarios where SVG assets are frequently updated or sourced externally. This limitation breaks the common developer expectation of being able to reuse SVG assets out-of-the-box — especially when sourcing icons or illustrations from design systems, marketplaces, or third-party libraries. 

Author: Done

Ultimately, the lack of support for referencing entire external SVG files using `use` reduces developer productivity, increases the risk of inconsistencies, and makes scalable asset management more challenging — particularly for complex graphics and large icon sets. ( Refer Section [Customer/Developer Feedback: Pain Points](#6-customerdeveloper-feedback-pain-points))  

## 3. Current Limitation

> To use the whole SVG with a `use` tag, you typically need to reference a specific element within the SVG file using a fragment identifier (an id with a hash #): 

Reviewer: I would phrase this as "To clone an SVG element with a `use` tag, you currently need to reference a specific element within the SVG file using a fragment identifier (an id with a hash #): "

```html
<svg> 

>   <use xlink:href="myshape.svg#icon"></use> 

Reviewer: SVG leaf elements typically use self-closing syntax, so they don't have closing tags - you can remove the `</use>` here.

</svg> 
```

In this example, `#icon` is the fragment identifier pointing to an element with `id="icon"` within myshape.svg, which might look like: 

_myshape.svg_

```html

> <svg id="icon" version="1.1" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" viewBox="0,0,512,512"> 

Reviewer: I would remove the empty newlines between SVG elements, as it doesn't improve readability and isn't a standard practice for SVG.

Author: Done

>  <circle cx="256" cy="256" r="200" fill="red" /> 

Reviewer: `fill="red"` generally indicates an error - I wouldn't use it in an example unless it's indicating incorrect behavior.

Author: Removed the fill altogether. So, the default colour black will be used instead.

</svg> 
```

## 4. Motivation and User Use Case

> The above [limitation](#3-current-limitation) introduces the below issues while using #id:

Reviewer: "while using #id" -> "while using a fragment identifier"

Author: Done

### 4.1 Manual Editing: 

**Example:** Consider an SVG file without an id: 

```html
<svg version="1.1" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" viewBox="0,0,512,512"> 

 <circle cx="256" cy="256" r="200" fill="red" /> 

</svg> 
```

To use this SVG with a <use> tag, you need to add an id: 

```html
<svg id="icon" version="1.1" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" viewBox="0,0,512,512"> 

  <circle cx="256" cy="256" r="200" fill="red" /> 

</svg> 
```

Then reference it: 

```html
<svg> 

  <use xlink:href="myshape.svg#icon"></use> 

</svg> 
```

### 4.2 Downsides of Using id# 

- **Increased Workload:** Manually adding id attributes to each SVG file increases the workload, especially if you have many SVG files. 

- **Error-Prone:** Manual editing can lead to errors, such as typos or missing id attributes. 

- **Inconsistent Updates:** If the SVG files are updated frequently, ensuring that each file has the correct id can be challenging and lead to inconsistencies. 

- **Maintenance Overhead:** Keeping track of id attributes and ensuring they are correctly referenced adds to the maintenance overhead. 

> ## 5. Proposed Approach

Reviewer: It's probably also worth calling out that the SVG `<image>` element currently supports referencing entire SVG files, much like this proposal for `<use>`. 

There are differences between `<image>` and `<use>`, which makes this proposal still make sense - namely that `<image>` deliberately limits functionality such as scripts, and does not expose subtrees.

Author: I added a note with this information.

Allow the `use` element to reference entire SVG files without needing an id. This means we can reuse the whole SVG file like this: 

```html
<svg width="100" height="100"> 

  <use href="icon.svg" /> 

</svg>
``` 

> In above svg we now return the root svg element of `icon.svg` when the `use` element try to resolve its href target. That way the entire svg pointed by icon.svg will be rendered.

Reviewer: Make sure to consistently capitalize "SVG"

Author: Done

> In above svg we now return the root svg element of `icon.svg` when the `use` element try to resolve its href target. That way the entire svg pointed by icon.svg will be rendered.

Reviewer: "resolve its href target" -> "resolve its `href` target"

Author: Done

> In above svg we now return the root svg element of `icon.svg` when the `use` element try to resolve its href target. That way the entire svg pointed by icon.svg will be rendered.

Reviewer: "pointed by" -> "referenced by"

Author: Done

> Note that in the current code base if we use the above svg as is nothing will be rendered. As the `use` element is unable to resolve the target to render without the fragment identifier. 

Reviewer: "as is" -> "as-is"

Author: Done

# Allow `use` to reference an external document's root element by omitting the fragment. 

## Authors:

> - Divyansh Mangal (dmangal@microsoft.com)

Author: Added my Github email id as well

Ultimately, the lack of support for referencing entire external SVG files using `use` reduces developer productivity, increases the risk of inconsistencies, and makes scalable asset management more challenging — particularly for complex graphics and large icon sets. ( Refer Section [Customer/Developer Feedback: Pain Points](#7-customerdeveloper-feedback-pain-points))  

## 3. Current Limitation

To use the whole SVG with a `use` tag, you typically need to reference a specific element within the SVG file using a fragment identifier (an id with a hash #): 

```html
<svg> 

  <use xlink:href="myshape.svg#icon"></use> 

</svg> 
```

> In this example, `#icon` is the fragment identifier pointing to an element with id="icon" within myshape.svg, which might look like: 

Author: Done

_myshape.svg_

```html
<svg id="icon" version="1.1" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" viewBox="0,0,512,512"> 

 <circle cx="256" cy="256" r="200" fill="red" /> 

</svg> 
```

## 4. Motivation and User Use Case

The above [limitation](#3-current-limitation) introduces the below issues while using #id:

### 4.1 Manual Editing: 

> - **Adding id:** You need to manually add an id to the root element of every SVG file you want to reference. This can be time-consuming and error prone. 

Reviewer 2: The point that having to re-add the ID is time consuming and error prone is well-taken, but it's repeated several times. Consider omitting the lines "Adding id" and "Re-editing" lines here, since those points are repeated in section 4.2.

Author: Omitted this as suggsted.

  <circle cx="256" cy="256" r="200" fill="red" /> 

</svg> 
```

Then reference it: 

```html
<svg> 

  <use xlink:href="myshape.svg#icon"></use> 

</svg> 
```

### 4.2 Downsides of Using id# 

- **Increased Workload:** Manually adding id attributes to each SVG file increases the workload, especially if you have many SVG files. 

- **Error-Prone:** Manual editing can lead to errors, such as typos or missing id attributes. 

- **Inconsistent Updates:** If the SVG files are updated frequently, ensuring that each file has the correct id can be challenging and lead to inconsistencies. 

- **Maintenance Overhead:** Keeping track of id attributes and ensuring they are correctly referenced adds to the maintenance overhead. 

## 5. Proposed Approach
Allow the `use` element to reference entire SVG files without needing an id. This means we can reuse the whole SVG file like this: 

```html
<svg width="100" height="100"> 

  <use href="icon.svg" /> 

</svg>
``` 

Note that in the current code base if we use the above svg as is nothing will be rendered. As the `use` element is unable to resolve the target to render without the fragment identifier. 
 

> To implement this, we propose the below changes:  

Reviewer 2: The focus of an explainer is to clarify the problem being solved and to try to build consensus around a solution (see https://tag.w3.org/explainers/). Implementation details for a given platform are generally out of scope. The implementation details would be helpful for a different audience, namely the upstream stakeholders code reviewing your CLs, and as such it's better to split these into a Google doc separate from the explainer. Or for a smaller change like this, a design doc may not be needed; the Chromium CL may speak for itself.

In any case, it's best to omit these from the explainer.

Author: Got it, I have removed the implementation details, and yes you are right since the change is fairly contained a design doc may also be not needed here as I already have a CL with those details.
https://chromium-review.googlesource.com/c/chromium/src/+/6370320

![](img/use-update.png)

Here we will be bypassing the condition `element_url_.HasFragmentIdentifier() ` by means of feature flag so that `use` element is still able to fetch the external document succesfully.

### 5.2 Retrieve svg root element from the external document: 
Once the external document is successfully fetched. We get the fetched resource in the form of `document_content_`

[Member< SVGResourceDocumentContent > document_content_](https://source.chromium.org/chromium/chromium/src/+/main:third_party/blink/renderer/core/svg/svg_use_element.h;drc=7334424b6359af19a92dee7da024b6cffc486bb7;l=117)

We will introduce a public function in `SVGResourceDocumentContent` to get the svg root of the external file programmatically from the dom. The function will look like: 

```cpp
SVGResourceTarget* SVGResourceDocumentContent::GetResourceTargetForRoot() const { 

  Document* document = GetDocument(); 

  if (!document) { 
    return nullptr; 
  } 

  auto* svg_target = DynamicTo<SVGSVGElement>(document->documentElement()); 

  if (!svg_target) { 
    return nullptr; 
  } 

  return &svg_target->EnsureResourceTarget(); 
} 
```

> ## 6. Importance of this feature

Author: Removed section 6 due to redundancy, I felt section 7 was a good addition as it gives the exact stackoverflow links depicting use interests and contexts, so I have kept that one but let me know if you think otherwise.

> ## 6. Importance of this feature

Reviewer 2: I agree with keeping the stackoverflow links, those are great.

- **Better Organization:** Developers can organize their SVG assets more effectively, making it easier to manage and maintain large projects. 

## 7. Customer/Developer Feedback: Pain Points  

*Whenever I import an SVG with <use> element it won't work unless I specify the id of that SVG even though it's the only SVG in the document!* [Link](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/68746095/why-cant-i-import-an-svg-by-using-use-without-using-the-id)  

https://stackoverflow.com/q/47595422/8583692 
*SVG external reference without id*

https://stackoverflow.com/q/50896563/8583692
*Why do SVG fragment identifiers without hash not work?* 

https://stackoverflow.com/q/41809208/8583692
*Why the <use> element in SVG doesn't work?* 

https://stackoverflow.com/q/7215009/8583692  
*How to reference external SVG file in SVG correctly?* 

https://stackoverflow.com/q/55452106/8583692
*How to use the whole SVG with a <use> tag?*

https://stackoverflow.com/q/53794292/8583692
*Display external SVG with <use> tag and href or xlink:href attribute?* 

https://stackoverflow.com/q/68746095/8583692
*Why can't I import an SVG by using <use> without using the id?* 

## 8. Appendix 

> ### Appendix 1: Current Situation (As-Is) vs Future (To-Be) 

Author: Removed due to redundancy

#### As-Is  

- **Manual Editing:** The user has to manually add an id fragment identifier to every SVG icon they use. 

- **Repetitive Work:** If the designer updates the icon, the user must re-edit the SVG code to add the id again. 

- **Time-Consuming:** This process is time-consuming and prone to errors, leading to inefficiencies. 

#### To-Be 

- **Direct Reference:** The user can reference entire external SVG files directly using the `use` element without needing an id fragment identifier. 

- **Automatic Updates:** Any changes made by the designer to the external SVG file will automatically reflect wherever it is used, without additional manual edits. 

- **Efficiency:** This reduces the time and effort required to manage SVG icons, making the workflow more efficient and less error prone. 

## 9. References & acknowledgements 

Many thanks for valuable feedback and advice from: 

> - Fredrik Söderquist (fs@opera.com)

Author: Removed all emails as suggested
